---
category: behaviours
slug: b1
---

# B1: works independently and takes responsibility

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Assessment Method | Pass | Distinction |
| :---: | --- | :---: |
| Portfolio | Describes how they have operated independently to complete tasks to given deadlines which reflect the level of responsibility assigned to them by the organisation. (B1) | NA |

The behavior of working independently and taking responsibility as a software
developer refers to several key aspects of professional conduct. Let's break
down each element:

1. **Works independently**: This means that the apprentice software developer is
   capable of completing tasks and solving problems on their own, without
   constant supervision or guidance. They can effectively manage their time, set
   priorities, and make progress on their assigned work without relying heavily
   on others for assistance.

2. **Takes responsibility**: It entails accepting ownership and accountability
   for one's actions and outcomes. The apprentice developer takes initiative and
   acknowledges their role in the success or failure of a task or project. They
   don't shy away from admitting mistakes or learning from them, and they
   actively seek solutions to rectify any issues that arise.

3. **Disciplined and responsible approach to risk**: As a software developer,
   it's important to assess and manage risks associated with projects or tasks.
   The apprentice demonstrates discipline by considering potential risks, such
   as technical challenges, deadlines, or resource limitations, and takes
   proactive measures to mitigate them. They prioritize stability and security
   in their code, adhere to best practices, and actively seek feedback or
   guidance when unsure.

4. **Stays motivated and committed when facing challenges**: Software
   development often presents complex problems and obstacles that require
   perseverance and resilience. The apprentice developer remains motivated and
   dedicated even in the face of challenges. They approach difficulties with a
   positive attitude, seek creative solutions, and persistently work towards
   overcoming obstacles rather than becoming discouraged or giving up easily.

An apprentice software developer who demonstrates these behaviors works
effectively and efficiently without constant supervision, takes ownership of
their work, evaluates and addresses risks responsibly, and maintains a motivated
and committed attitude when confronted with challenges.

[Back](../README.md)
