---
category: behaviours
slug: b2
---

# B2: applies logical thinking

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
| Assessment Method | Pass | Distinction |
| :---: | --- | :---: |
| Work-based project | Establishes a logical thinking approach to areas of work which require valid reasoning and/or justified decision making. (B2) | NA |

"Applying logical thinking" in the context of a software developer means
utilizing clear and valid reasoning when making decisions related to their work
instructions. It involves employing a logical approach to problem-solving and
decision-making processes.

Here's a breakdown of what this behavior entails:

1. **Analyzing the Problem**: When faced with a task or problem, the apprentice
   software developer should carefully examine and understand the requirements,
   constraints, and any relevant information. This involves breaking down
   complex problems into smaller, manageable components.

2. **Identifying Solutions**: Once the problem is understood, the apprentice
   should think critically to generate potential solutions. This may involve
   considering different approaches, algorithms, design patterns, or tools that
   could be used to address the problem effectively.

3. **Evaluating Options**: The developer should assess the potential solutions
   and compare them based on their feasibility, efficiency, maintainability, and
   other relevant factors. They should logically evaluate the pros and cons of
   each option to make an informed decision.

4. **Applying Reasoning**: The apprentice software developer should justify
   their decisions using clear and valid reasoning. This includes explaining why
   a particular solution or approach is the most suitable, based on the
   requirements, constraints, and industry best practices. They should be able
   to articulate their thought process and demonstrate logical thinking behind
   their choices.

5. **Considering Consequences**: The apprentice should anticipate and evaluate
   the potential implications and consequences of their decisions. They should
   consider factors such as performance, scalability, security, and
   maintainability to ensure the chosen solution aligns with best practices and
   long-term goals.

6. **Documenting and Communicating**: It is essential for the apprentice to
   document their reasoning and decisions effectively. This allows others to
   understand the rationale behind their work and promotes collaboration within
   a team. Clear and concise communication of their logical thinking helps
   others to review, provide feedback, or collaborate on the project.

Applying logical thinking involves a systematic and methodical approach to
problem-solving, decision-making, and communicating the reasoning behind choices
made in the context of work instructions.

[Back](../README.md)
