---
category: duties
slug: d4
---

# D4: identify and report any impediments to software development activities and propose practical solutions.

1. **Identify and Report any Impediments to Software Development Activities:** This basically means that the apprentice software developer should always be on the lookout for anything that is slowing down, blocking, or could potentially block the development process. This could include a range of issues, from technical problems (such as bugs in the code, inadequate system resources, slow development tools) to process-related issues (such as unclear requirements, insufficient testing, slow approval processes) and human-related issues (like communication issues, lack of necessary skills or knowledge).

   The responsibility here is not just to identify these problems, but also to report them. This usually means bringing them to the attention of the development team and any other relevant stakeholders. The process of reporting these impediments typically includes describing the problem, its impact on the development process, and any other relevant information that would help in understanding and resolving the issue.

2. **Propose Practical Solutions:** Once an issue has been identified and reported, the apprentice developer should, if possible, propose a practical solution to address the issue. The term 'practical' is important here – the solution should be something that can feasibly be implemented, given the team's current resources, skills, and project constraints.

   Proposing a solution doesn't necessarily mean the apprentice developer will be the one to implement it – they may not have the skills or authority to do so. But by putting forward a possible solution, they can contribute to the problem-solving process and facilitate the team's work. This also demonstrates proactive problem-solving attitude which is a valuable trait in a software developer.

Remember, the purpose of these duties is to keep the software development process running smoothly and efficiently. They are part of the broader role of a software developer, which involves not just writing code, but also contributing to the successful delivery of a software product.

[Back](../README.md)
